docs: adds decision record for the vault auth refactor (#1)
SaschaIsele/Connector: docs/developer/decision-records/2024-10-09-vault-authentication-refactor/README.md

# Hashicorp Vault authentication refactor

## Decision

Refactor the HashiCorp Vault extension and make it extensible with different methods of authentication.

## Rationale

The current implementation of the authentication in the HashiCorp Vault extension has no way to add new authentication methods and to switch between them.
The full list of possible authentication methods can be found in the [HashiCorp Vault Documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth)
Relevant examples are:

* [Token auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/token)
* [Kubernetes auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/kubernetes)
* [AppRole auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/approle)
It goes against the EDC extensibility model and needs to be remedied.
Additionally, extracting the current implementation of the token authentication into its own extension will improve readability and maintainability of the code.

## Approach
The refactor will affect only the `vault-hashicorp` extension.

To allow an extensible authentication module for HashiCorp Vault, the implementation will follow the registry pattern.

### Vault Auth SPI

> To allow the proper organisation of the interfaces needed for the refactoring, a new module named `vault-auth-spi` is introduced in the `spi` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow the proper organisation of the interfaces needed for the refactoring, a new module named `hashicorp-vault-auth-spi` is introduced in the `spi` directory.
```

### Vault Authentication Auth interface

To interact with a multitude of different authentication methods, an interface for the Vault Authentication Service is needed.
This interface will contain two methods:

* `login()`

> * `getVaultToken()`

Reviewer: no need to list them here as they're listed in the interface some lines below

```java
public interface HashicorpVaultAuth {

>     // Contains the authentication and generates the `client_token` from HashiCorp Vault in accordance to the chosen auth method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Execute the authentication logic, generates and store the `client_token` from HashiCorp Vault in accordance to the chosen auth method.
```

(just guessing, let me know if my proposal is correct)

    void login();
    
    // The stored token is returned.
    String vaultToken();
    
}
```

> This interface will later be registered in a registry and used by the `HashicorpVaultClient` to receive the `client_token` for the request authentication.

Reviewer: an interface cannot be registered, you mean interface implementations right? Maybe this explanation can be made in the "registry" section directly/

More on that in the sections [Registration](#registration) and [HashiCorp Vault Client](#HashiCorp-Vault-Client)

### Vault Authentication Auth implementation example

> The Vault Authentication Service Implementations each implement a single HashiCorp Vault Authentication method.

Reviewer: please rephrase, like
```suggestion
Each Vault Authentication implementation implements a single HashiCorp Vault Authentication method.
```

> To achieve this, each extension contains an implementation of the newly introduced Vault Authentication Service interface.

Reviewer: This sentence adds nothing to the previous one, can be deleted

> The goal of each extension is to authenticate with HashiCorp Vault and to provide a valid `client_token` to the `HashicorpVaultClient`.

Reviewer: this was already described in the interface example above, can be deleted

    
    @Override
    public void login() {
        // no login is needed for the token authentication method since it is already given with the config
        // with other implementations like kubernetes auth, a `client_token` will be generated here
    }
    
}
```

### Registry

Interface:

```java
public interface VaultAuthenticationRegistry {
    
    void register(String method, HashicorpVaultAuth authImplementation);
    
    @NotNull
    HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method);
    
    boolean hasService(String method);
}
```

Implementation:

```java
public class VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl implements VaultAuthenticationRegistry {
    
    private final Map<String, HashicorpVaultAuth> services = new HashMap<>();

    public VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl() {
    }

    @Override
    public void register(String context, HashicorpVaultAuth service) {
        services.put(method, service);
    }

    @Override
    public @NotNull HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method) {
        return services.get(method);
    }

    @Override
    public boolean hasService(String method) {
        return services.containsKey(method);
    }
}
```

### Registration

> Each Auth implementation will register itself in the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Auth implementation instance will be registered on the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry`.
```

> This is done through an `@Provider` method inside the HashiCorp Vault extension, that is then injected with `@Inject` into the Service Implementation.

Reviewer: "this" referred to what? the context looked changed from the previous statement

```java
@Provider
public VaultAuthenticationRegistry vaultAuthenticationRegistry() {
    return new VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl();
}
```

> The `VaultAuthenticationRegistry` is injected into the Vault Authentication Service Implementations through `@Inject`.

Reviewer: ???
(what do you mean with Vault Authentication Service Implementations?)

## Rationale

The current implementation of the authentication in the HashiCorp Vault extension has no way to add new authentication methods and to switch between them.
The full list of possible authentication methods can be found in the [HashiCorp Vault Documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth)
Relevant examples are:

* [Token auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/token)
* [Kubernetes auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/kubernetes)
* [AppRole auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/approle)
It goes against the EDC extensibility model and needs to be remedied.
Additionally, extracting the current implementation of the token authentication into its own extension will improve readability and maintainability of the code.

## Approach
The refactor will affect only the `vault-hashicorp` extension.

To allow an extensible authentication module for HashiCorp Vault, the implementation will follow the registry pattern.

### Vault Auth SPI

To allow the proper organisation of the interfaces needed for the refactoring, a new module named `vault-auth-spi` is introduced in the `spi` directory.

> ### Vault Authentication Service Interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Vault Authentication Auth interface
```

To interact with a multitude of different authentication methods, an interface for the Vault Authentication Service is needed.
This interface will contain two methods:

* `login()`
* `getVaultToken()`

> `login()` contains the authentication and fetches/generates the `client_token` from HashiCorp Vault.

Reviewer: it's not clear how should this be used

Author: comment for login should be clearer now

`getVaultToken()` returns the saved `client_token` when needed.

> 

Reviewer: these lines can be removed, comments can be added as java comments in the interface below

```java
public interface HashicorpVaultAuth {

    void login();
    
    String getVaultToken();
}
```

> ### Vault Authentication Service Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Vault Authentication Auth implementation example
```

The Vault Authentication Service Implementations each implement a single HashiCorp Vault Authentication method.
To achieve this, each extension contains an implementation of the newly introduced Vault Authentication Service interface.
The goal of each extension is to authenticate with HashiCorp Vault and to provide a valid `client_token` to the `HashicorpVaultClient`.

Interface Implementation:

```java
public record HashicorpVaultTokenAuth(@NotNull String vaultToken) implements HashicorpVaultAuth {

    private String vaultToken;
    
    @Override
    public void login() {
        // no login is needed for token authentication
    }

    @Override

>     public String getVaultToken() {

Reviewer: if the base method is called `vaultToken` there will be no need for this override

        return vaultToken;
    }
}
```

> Simple example Token Auth Service Implementation:

Reviewer: this example is about the extension not the "service implementation".
plus, it's already explained in the `Registration` section

Author: did remove the example since it is already explained in the registration section

        var token = context.getSetting(VAULT_TOKEN, null);
        
        if (!vaultAuthenticationRegistry.hasService("token-based")) {
            vaultAuthenticationRegistry.register("token-based", HashicorpVaultTokenAuth(token));
        }
 
    }
    
}
```

### Registry

Interface:

```java
public interface VaultAuthenticationRegistry {
    
    void register(String method, HashicorpVaultAuth authImplementation);
    
    @NotNull
    HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method);
    
    boolean hasService(String method);
}
```

Implementation:

```java
public class VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl implements VaultAuthenticationRegistry {
    
    private final Map<String, HashicorpVaultAuth> services = new HashMap<>();

    public VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl() {
    }

    @Override
    public void register(String context, HashicorpVaultAuth service) {
        services.put(method, service);
    }

    @Override
    public @NotNull HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method) {
        return services.get(method);
    }

    @Override
    public boolean hasService(String method) {
        return services.containsKey(method);
    }
}
```

### Registration

> Each Service Implementation will register itself in the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Auth implementation will register itself in the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry`.
```

Due to the possible differences in the configuration of each authentication method, each Vault Authentication Service Extension comes with its own configuration values.

### HashiCorp Vault Client

Since the client contains a lot of authentication logic, it will also go through a refactoring.
After the refactoring it will only use the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry` based on the configured `edc.vault.hashicorp.auth.method` to fetch the `client_token` that is provided by the Vault Authentication Service Extensions.
The `client_token` will then be used to generate the Headers for the HTTP requests.

Old `getHeaders()`:

```java
@NotNull
private Headers getHeaders() {
    var headersBuilder = new Headers.Builder().add(VAULT_REQUEST_HEADER, Boolean.toString(true));
    headersBuilder.add(VAULT_TOKEN_HEADER, settings.token());
    return headersBuilder.build();
}
```

Example for new `getHeaders()`:
```java
@NotNull
private Headers getHeaders() {
    var headersBuilder = new Headers.Builder().add(VAULT_REQUEST_HEADER, Boolean.toString(true));

>     headersBuilder.add(VAULT_TOKEN_HEADER, vaultAuthenticationRegistry.resolve(settings.getAuthMethod()).getVaultToken());

Reviewer: given that the settings are immutable, i don't see the point to keep a registry

    return headersBuilder.build();
}
```

> ### HashiCorp Vault Token Authentication Extension

Reviewer: `spi` is not mentioned here, but it will be necessary to provide the interfaces for the eventual extensions

Author: the addition of an `spi` module for the authentication already has a mention in its own section `Vault Auth SPI`

* [AppRole auth](https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/docs/auth/approle)

It goes against the EDC extensibility model and needs to be remedied.
Additionally, extracting the current implementation of the token authentication into its own extension will improve readability and maintainability of the code.

## Approach

The refactor will affect only the `vault-hashicorp` extension.
It will create one additional extension called `vault-hashicorp-auth-tokenbased` that contains the token authentication and token renewal functionality.

To allow an extensible authentication for HashiCorp Vault, the implementation will follow the registry pattern.

### Hashicorp Vault Auth SPI

For the proper organisation of the interfaces needed for the refactoring, a new module named `hashicorp-vault-auth-spi` is introduced in the `spi` directory.

It will contain the following interfaces:

* [Hashicorp Vault Auth Interface](#hashicorp-vault-auth-interface)
* [Hashicorp Vault Auth Registry Interface](#hashicorp-vault-auth-registry)

### Hashicorp Vault Auth Interface

To implement a multitude of different authentication methods, an interface for the Hashicorp Vault authentication is needed.

> The sole common point between the authentication methods is the need to provide a `client_token` that can be used to authenticate with HashiCorp Vault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sole common point between the authentication methods is the ability to provide a `client_token` that can be used to authenticate with HashiCorp Vault.
```

More on the usage of the `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry` for registration in the [HashiCorp Vault Auth Registration](#hashicorp-vault-auth-registration) section.
The `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistryImpl` is added to the constructor of `HashicorpVaultClient` and can then be used to retrieve the `vaultToken` for the Header creation, more in that in the [HashiCorp Vault Client](#hashicorp-vault-client) section.

```java
public interface HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry {
    
    void register(String method, HashicorpVaultAuth authImplementation);
    
    @NotNull
    HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method);
    
    boolean hasService(String method);
}
```

```java
public class HashicorpVaultAuthRegistryImpl implements HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry {
    
    private final Map<String, HashicorpVaultAuth> services = new HashMap<>();

    public HashicorpVaultAuthRegistryImpl() {
    }

    @Override
    public void register(String context, HashicorpVaultAuth service) {
        services.put(method, service);
    }

    @Override
    public @NotNull HashicorpVaultAuth resolve(String method) {
        return services.get(method);

>     }

Reviewer: the `@NotNull` annotation is not satisfied by the return statement, because the `get` method can return `null`.
A possibility here would be to throw an `IllegalArgumentException` in case the auth object is null.

    @Override
    public boolean hasService(String method) {
        return services.containsKey(method);
    }
}
```

### Hashicorp Vault Auth Registration

During the `initialize()` call, service extensions providing an auth method will register an instance of their `HashicorpVaultAuth` implementation in the `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry`.
The `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry` is provided to the service extension through use of the provider pattern by the `HashicorpVaultExtension`.

```java
@Provider
public HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry hashicorpVaultAuthRegistry() {
    return new HashicorpVaultAuthRegistryImpl();
}
```

Inside the service extension providing an `HashicorpVaultAuth` implementation, the `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry` is injected.

```java
@Inject
private HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry hashicorpVaultAuthRegistry;
```

The injected `HashicorpVaultAuthRegistry` is used to register the `HashicorpVaultAuth` implementation.

```java
@Override
public void initialize(ServiceExtensionContext context) {
    var token = context.getSetting(VAULT_TOKEN, null);

>     if (!hashicorpVaultAuthRegistry.hasService("token-based")) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if (!hashicorpVaultAuthRegistry.hasMethod("token-based")) {
```

in the configuration this value is called "method", that I think it fits better than "service", let's use that term everywhere ("auth method" or only "method" where the auth part is implicit as in this call)

        hashicorpVaultAuthRegistry.register("token-based", HashicorpVaultTokenAuth(token));

>     }

Reviewer: I would avoid this condition as it is hiding logic to the user (if that service already exist, the user won't be aware.

Here we have two possibilities:
- don't care and override
- throw exception that will stop the runtime, as the authentication method "id" should be unique, so there's no point in registering two authentication methods with the same id (preferred way)

This includes the token refresh functionality and will lead to a refactoring of the following classes:

`HashicorpVaultExtension.java`: `initialize()` no longer will start the token refresh and `stop()` will be removed since the extension does not govern token refresh anymore.

`HashicorpVaultClient.java`: `isTokenRenewable()` and `renewToken()` and their private methods will be moved to a new dedicated client in the Token Auth Extension.

`HashicorpVaultSettings.java`: some settings are moved and two new ones are added as described in the sections [HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension Settings](#hashicorp-vault-token-auth-extension-settings) and [Configuration](#configuration).

`HashicorpVaultTokenRenewTask.java`: is moved to the HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension in its entirety.

The respective tests covering the moved functionality are also moved accordingly.

### HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension

The HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension will contain the token storage functionality and the token refresh functionality that has been removed from the HashiCorp Vault Extension.

#### HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension Settings

> The following settings have been moved from the HashiCorp Vault Extension to th HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following settings will be moved from the HashiCorp Vault Extension to the HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension.
```

Duplicate setting from the HashiCorp Vault Extension, since the HashiCorp Vault Token Auth Extension also needs access to the vault.
`edc.vault.hashicorp.url`

Settings moved from the HashiCorp Vault Extension, that only concern the token storage and token refresh.
`edc.vault.hashicorp.token`
`edc.vault.hashicorp.token.scheduled-renew-enabled`
`edc.vault.hashicorp.token.ttl`
`edc.vault.hashicorp.token.renew-buffer`

### HashiCorp Vault Health Extension

The `get()` method of `HashicorpVaultHealthCheck` is currently using a merge of the response from the Hashicorp Vault Health API and the ability to renew the given token.
After the refactor, the token renewal is no longer a part of the base `HashicorpVaultExtension`.
As such the `get()` method is adjusted and will only return the response from the Hashicorp Vault Health API.

## Further Considerations

Currently, the authentication method is chosen through configuration and unable to be changed at runtime.
If the need arises in the future, the authentication method may be chosen through the request headers instead while keeping the configuration setting as default.

> This option was explicitly left out in this decision record, to keep the refactored code as close to the original as possible in terms of functionality and API.

Reviewer: I wouldn't add these considerations as they are vague and definitely out of scope.

> # Decision Record Refactor of the HashiCorp Vault extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Hashicorp Vault authentication refactor
```

## Decision

Refactor the HashiCorp Vault extension and make it extensible with different methods of authentication.

## Rationale

> The current implementation of the authentication in the HashiCorp Vault extension has no way to add new authentication methods and to switch between them.

Reviewer: please list some possible authentication methods

It goes against the EDC extensibility model and needs to be remedied.
Additionally, extracting the current implementation of the token authentication into its own extension will improve readability and maintainability of the code.

> ## Affected Areas

Reviewer: no need for this chapter, it can be described in the `Approach` one with one sentence like: 
the refactor will affect the `vault-hashicorp` extension

HashiCorp Vault extension

## Approach

> To allow an extensible authentication module for HashiCorp Vault, an implementation similar to the existing management API authentication is possible.

Reviewer: > an implementation similar to the existing management API authentication is possible

if we want to state this, then there should be some sort of comparison, but is missing from the Approach.
I would just state that we will follow the registry pattern.

for completeness: please note that there's not management specific authentication, it's, in fact, usable also in other api contexts

> ### Vault Authentication Service Interface

Reviewer: It would be good to see how the current design will be modified

Author: Not quite sure what to do here.
Do you mean a comparison of the current hardcoded authentication and the extensible authentication?

Reviewer: you described the `HashicorpVaultAuth` interface but not where it will be injected to be used.

Author: added a line describing this below the code snipped for the interface and linked to the registration and client sections in there

To interact with a multitude of different authentication methods, an interface for the Vault Authentication Service is needed.
This interface will contain two methods:

> * `login()`

Reviewer: full interface example with name and compete signatures

* `getVaultToken()`

`login()` contains the authentication and fetches/generates the `client_token` from HashiCorp Vault.

> `getVaultToken()` returns the saved `client_token` when needed.S

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`getVaultToken()` returns the saved `client_token` when needed.
```

> ### Vault Authentication Service Extension

Reviewer: the "Extension" term is really specific in the EDC domain model, I would just call it "implementation"

> The Vault Authentication Service Extensions each implement a single HashiCorp Vault Authentication method.

Reviewer: rephrase

> To achieve this, each extension contains an implementation of the newly introduced Vault Authentication Service interface.

Reviewer: Add example(s)

> The goal of each extension is to authenticate with HashiCorp Vault and to provide a valid `client_token` to the `HashicorpVaultClient`.

Reviewer: Likely this will require to have an `spi` module to contain the interface, this should be documented here.

### Registration

> Each Service Extension will register itself on startup in the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry`.

Reviewer: "startup" is not a known phase in the EDC extension lifecycle.
add example

Author: left the phrasing out and added the registration call

This is done through an `@Provider` method inside the HashiCorp Vault extension.

```java
    @Provider
    public VaultAuthenticationRegistry vaultAuthenticationRegistry() {
        return new VaultAuthenticationRegistryImpl();
    }
```
S
Afterwards, the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry` is given injected into the Vault Authentication Service Extensions through `@Inject`.

```java
    @Inject
    private VaultAuthenticationRegistry vaultAuthenticationRegistry;

> ```

Reviewer: these info should go into a `### Registry` section

### Configuration

> A new config value is introduced to the HashiCorp Vault Extension named `edc.vault.hashicorp.auth.method`. This value governs which Vault Authentication Service Extension is used from the Vault Auth Registry.

Reviewer: What if that setting is configured with a method which extension is not registered at runtime? Wouldn't be better to let the runtime decide which authentication method use based on which module is registered?

Author: Deciding at runtime could be implemented with an additional header that specifies the auth method (default could be token-based to not break compatibility if the header is missing).
The user wants to only use one specific auth method, so letting the runtime decide on its own is not advisable.

Reviewer: I missed this comment, ok, I got that we want to avoid to have multiple runtimes build and being able to choose the auth type by configuration. I will modify my comments accordingly! :+1:

Due to the possible differences in the configuration of each authentication method, each Vault Authentication Service Extension comes with its own configuration values.

### HashiCorp Vault Client

Since the client contains a lot of authentication logic, it will also go through a refactoring.

> After the refactoring it will only use the `VaultAuthenticationRegistry` based on the configured `edc.vault.hashicorp.auth.method` to fetch the `client_token` that is provided by the Vault Authentication Service Extensions.

Reviewer: code example

### HashiCorp Vault Token Authentication Extension

> The current token based authentication is refactored and moved into its own extension named `hashicorp-auth-tokenbased`.

Reviewer: which classes?
